---
layout: post
title:  "Android 9 on Xiaomi Note 3 Pro"
tags: [Android, Xiaomi Redmi Note 3 Pro]
categories: life
---

It have been something around 3 month since i've switched to Android 8 and then Android 9 on my `Xiaomi Redmi 3 Pro Se (Kate)`. And today i've decided to rollback to MiUi. 


As a tribute to Android 9 I also decided to list what i've liked and disliked about new android. I would be back to Android 9 when bugs would be fixed and when project Treble would add normal hw support or would get page where I can check for one.

# 2018
## Why Yes
* When you minimize from Maps, Youtube - it would be shown as a small window, so you can multi-task (dial when using maps or whatever) 
* Nice glance inside notification bar applications 
* VR services are finally working
* App usage statistics - i've used it only like 2 times
* When charging - it shows mAmps (so you can switch charger / cable)
* APT-X (or at least what Bluetooth menu says)
* Bluetooth percentage for headphones (although always say 60%)

## Why Not
* Bluetooth calls does not work - it always redirects to earpiece. Which is terrible if you are riding bike and someone calls you.
* Keyboard swiping - autocompletion is broken and keyboard just crushes.
* Inconsistent call screen sensor detection - so after you've dialed someone you are left with black screen and no possibility to do anything
* Camera is so-so

## What are my feelings when i'm back to MiUi
* Fonts seems to be better
* Smooth!
* Goodies from Xiaomi - security, permissions, monitoring
* Still android 6.0 :(
* Bootloader is re-written by MiUi.

# April 2019
I'm back to Android 9.
I was tired from Miui:
*  my audiobook widget was not shown on lock screen.
*  some new crazy memory saving algorighms that were killing all apps (even pinned ones) and slow down
*  google play took forever to update 


Also I found out that there is a patch for camera and bluetooth calls. Hurray!
* Bluetooth Calls are fixed
* Looks and feels snappy (when it's not crashing)
* Highly-customizible - for example pull-down menu can have any number of toggles
* Much faster (at least now) than MIUI
* Again picture-in-picture
